
                  ************************************
                 ***     The code system ELSEPA     ***
                  ************************************

       Francesc Salvat, Aleksander Jablonski and Cedric J. Powell

                           September 27, 2004


   This code system computes scattering amplitudes and cross sections
for ELastic Scattering of Electrons and Positrons by neutral Atoms (Z=1
to 103), molecules and positive ions, and projectiles with kinetic
energies larger than about 10 eV. The calculations are usually performed
by means of relativistic (Dirac) partial wave analysis for an effective
local central-interaction potential. When the convergence of the partial
wave series is too slow, alternative approximate calculation methods are
applied. Scattering by molecules is described by using an independent-
atom approximation in which the scattering amplitudes are obtained by
adding coherently the waves scattered from all the atoms in the
molecule, and performing an average over random orientations of the
molecule.

   The distribution package consists of FORTRAN 77 programs (source code
files) and numerical data files. To ensure portability, all files are in
text (ASCII) format. The programs conform to ISO Standard FORTRAN 77,
except for the fact that they use COMPLEX*16 variables and intrinsic
functions (such as DCMPLX, CDABS, etc.) and END DO statements that are
available in all compilers which we have used. We also use 'INCLUDE'
statements to declare the external procedures used by a main program.


***  FILES IN THE DISTRIBUTION PACKAGE (213 files):

  'readme.txt' ... the present file.
  'elsepa.f' ..... calculation of elastic scattering of electrons
                   and positrons by neutral atoms and positive ions.
                   Dirac partial wave analysis for real and complex
                   central potentials; high-energy factorizations.
  'elscata.f' .... main program for scattering by atoms and ions.
  'elscatm.f'..... main program for scattering by molecules.
  'elscata.in', 'minimal.in' ... examples of input data files for
                   'elscata'.
  'h2o.in' ....... example of input data file for 'elscatm'.
  'z_nnn.den' .... DF electron densities of neutral atoms (Z=1-103).
  'z_nnn.dfs' .... high-energy DF screening functions (Z=1-103).
                   'nnn' (three digits) is the atomic number Z.

   The programs 'elscata' and 'elscatm' read data from input files,
whose structure is described in the heading comments of the FORTRAN 77
source files ('*.f'). Examples of input data files ('*.in') are included
in the distribution package. The calculated differential cross section
for the energy x.yyyezz (in eV, E format) is written to an output file
named 'dcs_xpyyyezz.dat', in a format ready for visualization with a
plotting program. Several subroutines write partial information (phase
shifts, imaginary potential, ...) on the standard output unit (=6) as
the calculation progresses; they may also generate files with the
extension '.dat' with self-explanatory contents. This does not impair
the calculation speed and helps the user to get a feeling of the time
that a planned calculation may take and to track partial results of the
calculation. Typical running times on a Pentium 4, 2.8 GHz, are between
a few seconds and about two minutes, depending on the atomic number of
the target, the adopted potential model and the kinetic energy of the
projectile.


***  OPERATION INSTRUCTIONS (for MS Windows).

1) Create a directory named 'elsepa' and copy there the distribution
package files (a total of 213 files).

2) Open a command (DOS) window and change directory to set 'elsepa' as
the current directory.

3) Generate the executable binary files 'elscata.exe' and 'elscatm.exe'
using your FORTRAN compiler.

   For example, when using the GNU FORTRAN compiler, these executable
   files are generated by means of the commands
      'g77 -O -Wall elscata.f -o elscata.exe'
      'g77 -O -Wall elscatm.f -o elscatm.exe'

   These two programs use the external subroutines and functions
contained in module 'elsepa.f'; this module has been 'inserted' into the
source files of the main programs by means of an 'INCLUDE' statement.

   Depending on the selected interaction potential model and the energy
of the projectile, the codes 'elscata' and 'elscatm' read information
from the files 'z_nnn.den' and 'z_nnn.dfs'. These files must be placed
in the same directory as the executable binary file.

4) Create the input data file 'mycase.in' for your problem, and place it
in directory 'elsepa'. Examples of input data files are provided in the
distribution package (they have the extension '.in').

5) Execute the code by entering the command
      'elscata.exe < mycase.in'  or  'elscatm.exe < mycase.in'
which redirects the standard input unit (=5) to your input data file.

                    -------------------------------

